T YPED -RAG: Type-Aware Decomposition of Non-Factoid Questions
for Retrieval-Augmented Generation
Ahjeong Park2∗ Hyeri Lee3 Hyeonseo Nam4 Yunho Maeng5, 6
1
POSTECH 2 Sookmyung Women’s University
3
Independent Researcher 4 KT 5 Ewha Womans University
6
LLM Experimental Lab, MODULABS

DongGeon Lee1 *

Correspondence: yunhomaeng@ewha.ac.kr

Factoid Question Answering

Abstract

arXiv:2503.15879v3 [cs.CL] 22 Jul 2025

When was Google founded?

Addressing non-factoid question answering
(NFQA) remains challenging due to its openended nature, diverse user intents, and need
for multi-aspect reasoning. These characteristics often reveal the limitations of conventional retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)
approaches. To overcome these challenges, we
propose T YPED -RAG, a framework for typeaware decomposition of non-factoid questions
(NFQs) within the RAG paradigm. Specifically, T YPED -RAG first classifies an NFQ
into a predefined type (e.g., Debate, Experience, Comparison). It then decomposes the
question into focused sub-queries, each focusing on a single aspect. This decomposition
enhances both retrieval relevance and answer
quality. By combining the results of these subqueries, T YPED -RAG produces more informative and contextually aligned responses. Additionally, we construct Wiki-NFQA, a benchmark dataset for NFQA covering a wide range
of NFQ types. Experiments show that T YPED RAG consistently outperforms existing QA approaches based on LLMs or RAG methods,
validating the effectiveness of type-aware decomposition for improving both retrieval quality and answer generation in NFQA. Our code
and dataset are available on https://github.
com/TeamNLP/Typed-RAG.

1

Google was founded on September 4, 1998.

Non-Factoid Question Answering
Which Portuguese wine is worth trying?
Try Touriga Nacional, Vinho Verde, or a Tawny Port for distinct flavors.
Touriga Nacional or Vinho Verde are great choices.
I’m not familiar enough with Portuguese wine to recommend one.

Figure 1: Comparison of factoid question answering
(top) and non-factoid question answering (bottom). Factoid questions typically have a single correct answer,
whereas non-factoid questions may admit multiple valid
answers.

Non-factoid questions (NFQs) represent a fundamentally different challenge from traditional factoid questions, as they require elaborate, interpretive responses that integrate multiple perspectives
rather than retrieving single facts (Bolotova et al.,
2022). These questions—encompassing comparative evaluations, personal experiences, and openended discussions—reflect the rich, multifaceted
nature of human information seeking. Figure 1 illustrates the key differences between factoid questions and NFQs, as well as their example answers.
Despite their prevalence in practical settings
(Yang and Alonso, 2024), current approaches to
non-factoid question answering (NFQA) face significant limitations. The core challenge lies in the
inherent complexity and heterogeneity of NFQs,
which vary along multiple dimensions including
question intent, aspect directionality, and degree of
contrast between perspectives.
Existing methods fail to adequately address
this diversity. Type-specific approaches to NFQA
(An et al., 2024)—methods that focus exclusively
on particular NFQ types—struggle to generalize
across the full spectrum of NFQ types, whereas
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems
(Lewis et al., 2020; Izacard and Grave, 2021), de-

Introduction

Traditional and current question answering (QA)
systems (Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Peters et al., 2018;
Lewis et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Zhang
et al., 2024) have primarily addressed factoid
questions—queries seeking specific, verifiable information that yield concise, objective answers like
“When was Google founded?”. However, real-world
information needs extend far beyond such simple
factual queries.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

1

spite improving contextuality, produce overly homogeneous responses that lack the multi-faceted
depth essential for comprehensive answers. Ultimately, the fundamental challenge is adapting
retrieval and generation strategies to the specific
characteristics of each NFQ type.
To address these limitations, we propose T YPED RAG, a type-aware decomposition approach that
fundamentally reimagines NFQA within the RAG
paradigm. Our approach integrates question type
classification directly into the RAG paradigm, enabling tailored retrieval and generation strategies
for distinct NFQ types. The key innovation lies in
decomposing multi-aspect NFQs into single-aspect
sub-queries, allowing targeted retrieval for each aspect before synthesizing a comprehensive response.
This decomposition approach ensures that generated answers align with user intent while capturing
the full complexity of the question.
In order to assess the performance of T YPED RAG, we evaluate it on Wiki-NFQA, a new benchmark dataset derived from Wikipedia that encompasses a broad spectrum of NFQ types. Our results
demonstrate that T YPED -RAG significantly outperforms baseline systems, including standard approaches using LLMs and RAG, in handling NFQ
complexity and delivering nuanced, intent-aligned
answers.
Our main contributions are as follows:

needs and current QA system capabilities, advancing the development of more adaptive and contextsensitive QA technologies.

2

Related Work

2.1 Non-Factoid Question Answering (NFQA)
Non-Factoid Question Taxonomy To address
the complexity of real-world QA, prior work has
developed detailed taxonomies for question types
(Burger et al., 2003; Chaturvedi et al., 2014; Bolotova et al., 2022). Unlike factoid questions, which
seek concise factual answers, non-factoid questions (NFQs) require subjective, multi-faceted responses (Chaturvedi et al., 2014; Bolotova et al.,
2022). Bolotova et al. (2022) categorized NFQs
into six types: Evidence-based, Comparison,
Experience, Reason, Instruction, and Debate.
Recently, Mishra et al. (2025) emphasized critical challenges faced by LLM-based QA systems
when handling NFQs, particularly those requiring
in-depth reasoning or nuanced debate, illustrated
through practical examples such as detailed descriptive questions (e.g., “How was the construction of the Taj Mahal perceived by the citizens of
Agra in the 17th century?”). Their work also highlighted specific application contexts where robust
NFQA systems are vital, including voice assistants
like Amazon Alexa (Hashemi et al., 2020) and
web forums frequently hosting user-generated descriptive queries (Bajaj et al., 2016). In contrast
to earlier approaches that target individual NFQ
types, our method provides a unified framework to
handle all categories effectively.

• We propose T YPED -RAG, a novel framework
for type-aware decomposition of non-factoid
questions that enhances RAG-based NFQA by
integrating question type classification with targeted decomposition strategies.
• We develop retrieval and generation strategies
specifically optimized for different NFQ types,
enabling more effective handling of complex and
diverse user queries.
• We release the Wiki-NFQA dataset, providing
a comprehensive benchmark for evaluating QA
systems on non-factoid questions and facilitating
future NFQA research.
• We demonstrate through extensive experiments
that T YPED -RAG significantly outperforms
baseline models, validating the effectiveness of
type-aware decomposition in generating contextually appropriate and high-quality answers.

Evaluation Metrics Traditional metrics—such
as ROUGE or BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020)—
often fall short in capturing the semantic richness
and nuanced quality of NFQA outputs. To overcome these limitations, Yang et al. (2024) introduced LINKAGE, a listwise ranking framework
that uses an LLM as a scorer to rank candidate
answers against quality-ordered references. LINKAGE shows stronger correlation with human judgments and outperforms conventional metrics, highlighting its suitability for NFQA evaluation.
2.2

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)

Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) improves
the quality of LLM responses by incorporating
external documents, improving factual accuracy
and contextual relevance (Lewis et al., 2020; Izacard and Grave, 2021). However, the quality of

By addressing the unique challenges of NFQA
through type-aware decomposition, our work
bridges the gap between complex user information
2

(a) Evidence-based
Non-Factoid
Question

Retriever

𝐾𝐾 References

Generator

Responses

(b) Comparison
Non-Factoid
Question

Multi-aspect
Decomposer

(c) Experience
Non-Factoid
Question

Multi-aspect
Decomposer

Single-aspect
𝑁𝑁 Single-aspect
Single-aspect
Query
Query
Queries

Top-𝐾𝐾 Reranked
References

𝑁𝑁 × 𝐾𝐾 References

Retriever

Single-aspect
𝑁𝑁 Single-aspect
Single-aspect
Query
Query
Queries

Reranker

Reranker

(d) Reason / Instruction / Debate

Non-Factoid
Question

Multi-aspect
Decomposer

Single-aspect
𝑁𝑁 Single-aspect
Single-aspect
Query
Query
Queries

𝐾𝐾 References

Retriever

Responses

Generator

Responses

𝐾𝐾 Reranked
References

𝐾𝐾 References

Retriever

Generator

𝑁𝑁

Generator

Answer
Aggregator
𝑁𝑁 Responses

Responses

Figure 2: Overview of T YPED -RAG. Non-factoid questions (NFQs) are first classified by a pretrained Type
Classifier and then processed according to their type. A Multi-aspect Decomposer and Answer Aggregator address
each type’s specific requirements using LLMs with tailored prompts. See Appendix A.4 and Figure 17 for prompt
details and a complete illustration.

RAG outputs critically depends on the retrieval
step: irrelevant or noisy documents can exacerbate hallucinations (Huang et al., 2023; Lee and
Yu, 2025). Recent advances apply query rewriting
and multi-hop decomposition to enrich retrieved
contexts (Rackauckas, 2024; Chan et al., 2024),
and adaptive retrieval strategies that assess querydocument relevance before the generation process
(Jeong et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024; Asai et al.,
2024).
Despite these developments, the application of
RAG to NFQA remains underexplored. For example, Deng et al. (2024) proposed a graph-based
multi-hop approach for NFQA, but it neither leverages large-scale pretrained LLMs nor employs dynamic retrieval. Likewise, An et al. (2024) integrated logic-based threading with RAG for HowTo questions, yet their method does not generalize
across all NFQ types. Our work bridges this gap
by combining type-specific decomposition with
adaptive retrieval and generation in a single RAG
framework.

3

NFQs are classified into one of six types using a
pre-trained Type Classifier (Bolotova et al., 2022).
Subsequently, queries are preprocessed through
the Multi-aspect Decomposer, where each type’s
characteristics and the underlying intent of the
questions are considered. The Multi-aspect Decomposer primarily consists of two modules: the
Single-aspect Query Generator and the Keyword
Extractor. These modules operate selectively based
on the question type and perspective, leveraging
few-shot learning and prompt engineering techniques to effectively transform queries according
to their respective categories. The decomposed
queries are then processed by one or multiple retrievers to retrieve highly relevant passages. Optionally, the retrieved passages may be re-ranked
using a reranker to enhance the quality of results.
Based on the retrieved information, the generator produces the final answers. If multiple candidate answers are available, the Answer Aggregator
integrates these candidates to form a unified response. This process is structured based on prompt
engineering. Detailed prompt configurations for
each module are presented in Appendix A.4.

Method

In this section, we introduce T YPED -RAG, a novel
RAG pipeline designed specifically for non-factoid
question (NFQ) types. Figure 2 visually illustrates
the overall processing mechanisms of the Multiaspect Decomposer and the Answer Aggregator
for each NFQ type.

As previously discussed, NFQs inherently involve multiple perspectives, making them challenging to handle effectively using conventional RAG
approaches. Considering these distinct characteristics, we propose a type-aware pipeline specifically
tailored to NFQs, capable of generating responses
3

NFQ Type

Example of Non-Factoid Question

Evidence-based

“How does sterilisation help to keep the money flow even?”

Comparison

“what is the difference between dysphagia and odynophagia”

Experience

“What are some of the best Portuguese wines?”

Reason

“Kresy, which roughly was a part of the land beyond the so-called Curson Line,
was drawn for what reason?”

Instruction

“How can you find a lodge to ask to be a member of?”

Debate

“I Can See Your Voice, a reality show from South Korea, offers what kind of
performers a chance to make their dreams of stardom a reality?”

Table 1: Example non-factoid questions in the Wiki-NFQA dataset, highlighting each NFQ type.

that accurately reflect user intent and address the
inherent complexity of these questions.
The subsequent subsections elaborate on the definitions of each NFQ type and the corresponding
detailed processing strategies.
3.1

sizing differences or superiority. Consequently,
Comparison type questions inherently involve multiple aspects.
Thus, a Multi-aspect Decomposer is required
for Comparison type questions. Initially, a Keyword Extractor identifies the purpose of comparison (compare_type) and the items being compared
(keywords_list). The purpose of the comparison is
predefined as one of three types: difference, similarity, or superior. These types are explicitly extracted from the question to determine the scope
of the comparison. Detailed prompt templates and
examples used in this process are described in Appendix A.4.1.
Subsequently, the retriever searches for documents related to each keyword, eliminates redundant results, and reranks the remaining documents
based on relevance. Finally, the generator synthesizes the information to produce a balanced response aligned with the comparison purpose. Collecting and integrating information across various
comparison criteria and perspectives is crucial for
accurately addressing user intent.

Evidence-based

Evidence-based type questions aim to clarify the
characteristics or definitions of specific concepts,
objects, or events. These questions require precise
and reliable factual information. These questions
inherently have a single aspect, eliminating the
need for complex contextual reasoning or multiaspect decomposition. The intent behind these
questions is to obtain clear and concise explanations grounded in evidence, resulting in responses
consistently centered around a single aspect.
Accordingly, a straightforward RAG approach
is applied to Evidence-based type questions. The
retriever utilizes the original question as a query to
search relevant documents, and the generator then
produces responses based directly on these documents. It is essential to maintain a clear and concise information flow without considering multiple
perspectives, thereby ensuring straightforward and
accurate answers.
3.2

3.3

Experience

Experience type questions seek advice, recommendations, or personal insights, with responses
based primarily on individual experiences. These
questions naturally involve multiple aspects, and
answers can vary significantly due to subjective differences among respondents. Thus, clearly understanding the user’s intent and defining key perspectives is essential to provide informative answers
encompassing diverse opinions and experiences.
Similar to Comparison type questions,
Experience type questions require multi-aspect

Comparison

Comparison type questions aim to identify differences, similarities, or superiority among two
or more items. These questions can have different intentions and must be tailored to the purpose
and targets of the comparison. Comparison type
questions can be broadly classified into two categories based on intent: related aspects, focusing
on similarities, and contrasting aspects, empha4

NFQ Type

NQ-NF

SQD-NF

TQA-NF

2WMHQA-NF

HQA-NF

MSQ-NF

Total

Evidence-based
Comparison
Experience
Reason
Instruction
Debate

99
5
0
19
2
1

130
18
20
85
21
26

251
4
8
23
3
7

10
0
1
55
8
5

22
8
10
15
4
3

43
1
2
21
11
4

555 (58.73%)
36 (3.81%)
41 (4.34%)
218 (23.07%)
49 (5.19%)
46 (4.87%)

Total

126

300

296

79

62

82

945

Table 2: Wiki-NFQA dataset statistics by NFQ type.

consideration; however, the focus is not on
comparisons based on specific features or criteria but rather on reflecting broader and more
comprehensive experiences and diverse opinions.
Therefore, Experience type questions require
multi-aspect decomposition.
Initially, the Keyword Extractor identifies the
primary topics that users seek experiences about
and extracts key entities reflecting the question’s
intent. Specific examples of the prompts used in
this process are detailed in Appendix A.4.2. Following this step, the retriever searches for related
documents using these extracted keywords. The retrieved documents are then re-ranked according to
their similarity to the extracted keywords. Finally,
the generator produces an optimized response by
synthesizing information that aligns with the user’s
intent and incorporates diverse perspectives. This
ensures the response effectively meets the user’s
expectations.
3.4

type questions. While various procedures may exist, their fundamental structure or concepts often
remain interconnected.
For both Reason and Instruction type questions, a Multi-aspect Decomposer is applied. Initially, a Single-aspect Query Generator decomposes the original query into separate single-aspect
queries. The retriever and generator then process each query individually, producing separate
responses. An Answer Aggregator subsequently
integrates these responses to deliver a clear, systematically organized final answer. Examples of
the prompts used in this process are detailed in
Appendix A.4.3.
3.5

Debate

Debate type questions focus on controversial topics and aim to explore and reflect multiple perspectives, especially opposing perspectives. These
questions inherently possess multiple perspectives
and require the inclusion of contrasting arguments
and perspectives, as subjective positions may vary
according to underlying assumptions and perspectives, unlike factual questions.
To effectively respond to Debate type questions,
it is essential to fairly represent the logic of each
opposing perspective and generate unbiased, balanced responses. Thus, a Multi-aspect Decomposer breaks down the question into debate topics
and diverse opinions. The Single-aspect Query
Generator then formulates individual queries for
each opinion. The retriever and generator process each query separately, producing individual
responses. Finally, an LLM with a debate mediator persona (Liang et al., 2024) synthesizes these
diverse perspectives, generating a balanced final
response from a mediator’s perspective. Detailed
prompts applied in the Single-aspect Query Generator and Debate Mediator processes are outlined in
Appendix A.4.4. This approach ensures responses

Reason/Instruction

Reason and Instruction type questions both aim
to provide information necessary for understanding
phenomena or solving problems, but they differ
significantly in intent and response approach.
The purpose of Reason type questions is to identify the causes of phenomena or events. These
questions require multi-faceted consideration because explanations can vary depending on contextual factors and conditions. Different assumptions
and conditions may yield multiple possible explanations, resulting in responses often including contrasting or conflicting information.
In contrast, Instruction type questions focus
on procedural steps or methodologies. Although
the procedures or methods can vary based on specific goals or requirements and thus involve multiple aspects, the responses tend to align similarly
rather than diverging significantly, unlike Reason
5

Prompt Template for LINKAGE
Please impartially rank the given candidate answer to a non-factoid question accurately within the
reference answer list, which are ranked in descending order of quality. The top answers are of the
highest quality, while those at the bottom may be poor or unrelated.
Determine the ranking of the given candidate answer within the provided reference answer list. For
instance, if it outperforms all references, output [[1]]. If it’s deemed inferior to all four references,
output [[4]].
Your response must strictly following this format: "[[2]]" if candidate answer could rank 2nd.
Below are the user’s question, reference answer list, and the candidate answer.
Question:{question}
Reference answer list:{reference_answers}
Candidate answer:{candidate_answer}
Figure 3: The LINKAGE prompt template from Yang et al. (2024) used to rank candidate answers in our evaluation
of T YPED -RAG and the baselines.

fairly and transparently reflect diverse perspectives,
enabling comprehensive and balanced information
delivery suitable for Debate type questions.

prompt PL , assigns rankci based on each candidate’s position within Ri . The complete LINKAGE prompt template is shown in Figure 3.

4

Experimental Setup

4.1

Model

Ranking Metrics To quantify LINKAGE rankings, we employ two complementary metrics:
Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) (Voorhees and Tice,
2000) and Mean Percentile Rank (MPR):

We compare our T YPED -RAG with LLM- and
RAG-based QA systems as baselines. In our experiments, we use a black-box LLM and two openweight LLMs with different numbers of parameters: (i) Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct (Llama-3.2-3B), (ii)
Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Mistral-7B; Jiang et al.,
2023), and (iii) GPT-4o-mini-2024-07-18 (GPT-4o
mini).
All inputs to the LLMs (including the RAG generator) are formatted using prompt templates. The
prompt templates used in our experiments are provided in Appendix A.3.

N

1 X 1
,
(3)
N
rankci
i=1

N 
1 X
rankci − 1
MPR =
1−
× 100. (4)
N
|Ri |

MRR =

i=1

MRR measures how close candidate answers rank
to the top of the list, with higher values indicating better performance. MPR converts each rank
into a percentile, reflecting the candidate’s relative position within its reference list; higher MPR
scores denote superior overall ranking across all
positions. Together, MRR highlights top-answer
accuracy, while MPR provides insight into performance across the entire ranking spectrum.

4.2 Listwise Ranking Evaluation (LINKAGE)
To evaluate non-factoid question answering
(NFQA) systems, we adopt LINKAGE (Yang et al.,
2024), a listwise ranking framework designed for
NFQA. LINKAGE orders each candidate answer
by comparing its quality against a reference list of
answers, defined formally as:
Ri = {ri1 , ri2 , . . . , rin },

4.3

To test the NFQA methods, we curate the WikiNFQA dataset, a specialized resource tailored for
NFQA. It is derived from existing Wikipedia-based
datasets: Natural Questions (NQ; Kwiatkowski
et al., 2019), SQuAD (SQD; Rajpurkar et al.,
2016), TriviaQA (TQA; Joshi et al., 2017), 2WikiMultiHopQA (2WMH; Ho et al., 2020), HotpotQA
(HQA; Yang et al., 2018), MuSiQue (MSQ; Trivedi
et al., 2022).

(1)


rankci = LLM PL , qi , ci , Ri .

Dataset Construction

(2)

Here, qi is the i-th question, ci is the candidate
answer under evaluation, and Ri is the set of reference answers {rik } sorted from highest to lowest
quality. The scorer LLM, guided by the LINKAGE
6

Model

Scorer LLM

Wiki-NFQA Dataset

Methods
NQ-NF

SQD-NF

TQA-NF

2WMH-NF

HQA-NF

MSQ-NF

Mistral-7B

LLM
RAG
T YPED -RAG

0.5893
0.5294
0.7659

0.5119
0.4944
0.6493

0.6191
0.5470
0.7061

0.3565
0.4150
0.4544

0.4825
0.4530
0.5624

0.4262
0.4047
0.5356

GPT-4o mini

LLM
RAG
T YPED -RAG

0.4934
0.4187
0.8366

0.4506
0.3553
0.7139

0.5380
0.4586
0.7013

0.3070
0.2859
0.3692

0.3669
0.2957
0.5470

0.2917
0.2866
0.4482

Mistral-7B

LLM
RAG
T YPED -RAG

0.6356
0.5635
0.7103

0.5450
0.5069
0.6333

0.6363
0.6233
0.6709

0.4821
0.4789
0.4747

0.5255
0.5323
0.6035

0.5081
0.4438
0.4512

GPT-4o mini

LLM
RAG
T YPED -RAG

0.4656
0.4411
0.8413

0.4222
0.3817
0.7444

0.5921
0.5450
0.7767

0.3175
0.2890
0.3987

0.3965
0.3562
0.6653

0.3384
0.3079
0.4929

Llama-3.2-3B

Mistral-7B

Table 3: Evaluation on the Wiki-NFQA dataset comparing various language models, scorer LLMs, and methods
using Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR). Answers were ranked with LINKAGE (Yang et al., 2024) and evaluated by
MRR.

Filtering Non-Factoid Questions Through a
systematic filtering process, we extract non-factoid
questions, then generate high-quality reference answers to ensure the dataset’s suitability for NFQA
evaluation.
We use the nf-cats1 (Bolotova et al., 2022), a
RoBERTa-based pre-trained NFQ category classifier, to extract NFQs from existing Wikipediabased datasets. Since it categorizes questions into
factoid and non-factoid types, we only retain those
classified as non-factoid for further processing. To
ensure a more rigorously curated dataset, we filter the data using heuristics based on the question
patterns outlined in the NFQ taxonomy proposed
by Bolotova et al. (2022). Table 2 presents the
statistics for the Wiki-NFQA dataset.

Comparison type questions seek distinctions between concepts. Experience type questions solicit
subjective opinions or recommendations, while
Reason type questions aim to uncover the rationale behind events or concepts. Instruction type
questions request procedural guidance, and Debate
type questions involve discussions on controversial
or interpretive topics.

5

We evaluate T YPED -RAG on the Wiki-NFQA
dataset across all NFQ categories and model configurations. As shown in Table 3 (MRR) and Figure
4 (MPR), T YPED -RAG consistently outperforms
both LLM- and RAG-based baselines. These metrics demonstrate that our approach not only elevates the ranking of generated answers but also
improves their relative quality. Scorer LLMs uniformly rate T YPED -RAG’s responses as more relevant and comprehensive. Representative examples
of T YPED -RAG’s outputs for each non-factoid
question type are provided in Appendix D.

Reference Answers Generation Since these
datasets only have a single-grade ground truth answer, we generate diverse reference answers of
varying quality for LINKAGE evaluation, as described in Yang et al. (2024). After constructing
the reference answers, we use the GPT-4o-202411-20 to annotate their quality level. Prompt details
about generating reference answers are provided
in Appendix A.1, and A.2.

5.1

Impact of Scorer LLMs and Base Models

The performance of all methods depends on the
choice of scorer LLM and base model. Since each
LLM evaluates responses using its own learned
criteria and internal representations, scores from
different scorers should not be compared directly.
Instead, performance comparisons are most meaningful when considering the relative ranking of
methods under the same scorer.

Examples of the Wiki-NFQA Dataset Table 1
provides examples of questions that represent each
type of NFQ in the Wiki-NFQA dataset.
The Evidence-based type questions require
answers grounded in verifiable sources, while
1

Experimental Results

https://huggingface.co/Lurunchik/nf-cats

7

75

EVIDENCE-BASED

COMPARISON

75

EXPERIENCE
60

50

50

40

25

25

20

0

LLM

RAG

REASON

Typed-RAG

0

LLM

RAG

Typed-RAG

0

INSTRUCTION

60

60

60

40

40

40

20

20

20

0

LLM

0

RAG Typed-RAG
LLM
RAG
Model: Llama-3.2-3B, Scorer: Mistral-7B
Model: Llama-3.2-3B, Scorer: GPT-4o mini

LLM

RAG

DEBATE

Typed-RAG

0

Typed-RAG
LLM
RAG Typed-RAG
Model: Mistral-7B, Scorer: Mistral-7B
Model: Mistral-7B, Scorer: GPT-4o mini

Figure 4: Comparison of Mean Percentile Rank (MPR) for LLMs, RAGs, and T YPED -RAG across six NFQ
categories in the Wiki-NFQA dataset. Results are shown for two model setups (Llama-3.2-3B and Mistral-7B) and
two scorer LLMs (Mistral-7B and GPT-4o mini); the y-axis displays MPR (%), where higher values indicate better
performance.

6

As reported in Table 3 and Figure 4, scores generally decrease when switching from Mistral-7B
to GPT-4o mini as the scorer. This trend likely
stems from GPT-4o mini’s greater sophistication
and stricter evaluation standards, which penalize
even minor inconsistencies or lack of depth. This
pattern holds across all base models and methods, underscoring that more powerful scorers apply
more stringent criteria. Notably, despite the overall
score reductions, T YPED -RAG retains a clear advantage over both LLM- and RAG-based baselines,
demonstrating its robustness to changes in scorer
strictness.
5.2

Conclusion

In this paper, we introduced T YPED -RAG, a novel
RAG-based framework for non-factoid question
answering (NFQA) that incorporates type-aware
multi-aspect decomposition. By first classifying
each NFQ into a specific category and then decomposing it into focused sub-queries, T YPED -RAG
enables targeted retrieval and answer generation
for each aspect. The retrieved sub-responses are
aggregated to produce comprehensive, nuanced answers that better address the diverse requirements
of non-factoid questions.
To support evaluation, we also curated WikiNFQA, a benchmark dataset covering a wide range
of NFQ types. Experimental results on WikiNFQA dataset show that T YPED -RAG consistently outperforms both LLM-only and standard
RAG baselines across all question types and scorer
LLM settings. These findings validate the effectiveness and robustness of type-aware multi-aspect
decomposition in enhancing both retrieval quality
and answer relevance for NFQA.
Future work could explore extending T YPED RAG to incorporate more fine-grained question
types and further refine the decomposition strategies. Additionally, applying our approach to other
specific domains or applying fine-tuning methods and integrating it with more sophisticated retrieval mechanisms could further improve the performance and adaptability of NFQA systems.

Limitations of RAG and Benefits of
T YPED -RAG

Our experiments also reveal that RAG-based methods underperform direct LLM-based generation
(see Table 3 and Figure 4). We attribute this
shortfall to the noise introduced by retrieved
factual information, which can hinder response
generation in NFQA tasks. T YPED -RAG addresses this challenge through a multi-aspect
decomposition strategy that structures retrieval
around the distinct facets of non-factoid questions. By reducing irrelevant noise and ensuring more focused retrieval, T YPED -RAG consistently outperforms both RAG and LLM-only approaches—particularly on reasoning-intensive subsets—thereby enhancing the overall quality of generated answers.
8

Limitations

ing to retrieve, generate, and critique through selfreflection. In The Twelfth International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna,
Austria, May 7-11, 2024.

Our work is the first to introduce RAG to NFQA,
but it has several limitations.
A key limitation is the absence of a direct comparison between T YPED -RAG and existing query
rewriting and decomposition methodologies. Although T YPED -RAG provides a structured approach to these tasks, its performance relative to
other techniques remains unexplored. Though various query rewriting and decomposition techniques
have been proposed to improve retrieval quality,
this study does not empirically evaluate the effectiveness of query reformulation, retrieval relevance,
or computational overhead of T YPED -RAG relative to these approaches. A systematic comparison
with these methods would provide a clearer understanding of T YPED -RAG’s advantages and limitations. Future work should incorporate benchmark
evaluations against these established techniques to
better position T YPED -RAG within the landscape
of query rewriting and decomposition research.
Another limitation of our evaluation setup is that
we use the same model to assess the quality of its
generated responses. This self-evaluation approach
may introduce bias because the model may struggle to distinguish differences in quality among the
answers it produced. To mitigate this issue, future
work could explore using stronger LLMs, human
assessments, or ensemble scoring methods for evaluation. Adopting these strategies would improve
the reliability of quality assessments and reduce
potential biases in our evaluation framework.

Payal Bajaj, Daniel Campos, Nick Craswell, Li Deng,
Jianfeng Gao, Xiaodong Liu, Rangan Majumder,
Andrew McNamara, Bhaskar Mitra, Tri Nguyen,
et al. 2016. MS MARCO: A human generated machine reading comprehension dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.09268.
Valeriia Bolotova, Vladislav Blinov, Falk Scholer,
W. Bruce Croft, and Mark Sanderson. 2022. A nonfactoid question-answering taxonomy. In Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, page 1196–1207.
John Burger, Claire Cardie, Vinay Chaudhri, Robert
Gaizauskas, Sanda Harabagiu, David Israel, Christian Jacquemin, Chin-Yew Lin, Steve Maiorano,
George Miller, Dan Moldovan, Bill Ogden, John
Prager, Ellen Riloff, Amit Singhal, Rohini Shrihari,
Tomek Strazalkowski, Ellen Voorhees, and Ralph
Weishedel. 2003. Issues, tasks and program structures to roadmap research in question & answering
(Q&A). In Document Understanding Conferences
Roadmapping Documents, pages 1–35.
Chi-Min Chan, Chunpu Xu, Ruibin Yuan, Hongyin Luo,
Wei Xue, Yike Guo, and Jie Fu. 2024. RQ-RAG:
Learning to refine queries for retrieval augmented
generation. In 1st Conference on Language Modeling.
Snigdha Chaturvedi, Vittorio Castelli, Radu Florian,
Ramesh M. Nallapati, and Hema Raghavan. 2014.
Joint question clustering and relevance prediction
for open domain non-factoid question answering. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on
World Wide Web, page 503–514.

Acknowledgments

Yang Deng, Wenxuan Zhang, Weiwen Xu, Ying
Shen, and Wai Lam. 2024. Nonfactoid question
answering as query-focused summarization with
graph-enhanced multihop inference. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems,
35(8):11231–11245.

This research was supported by Brian Impact Foundation, a non-profit organization dedicated to the
advancement of science and technology for all.
A prior version of this work was presented in a
non-archival form at the NAACL 2025 Student
Research Workshop.

Helia Hashemi, Mohammad Aliannejadi, Hamed Zamani, and W. Bruce Croft. 2020. ANTIQUE: A
non-factoid question answering benchmark. In Advances in Information Retrieval - 42nd European
Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, April 14-17, 2020, Proceedings, Part II, volume 12036 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 166–173.

References
Kaikai An, Fangkai Yang, Liqun Li, Junting Lu,
Sitao Cheng, Lu Wang, Pu Zhao, Lele Cao, Qingwei Lin, Saravan Rajmohan, Dongmei Zhang, and
Qi Zhang. 2024. Thread: A logic-based data organization paradigm for how-to question answering
with retrieval augmented generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.13372.

Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara,
and Akiko Aizawa. 2020. Constructing a multihop QA dataset for comprehensive evaluation of
reasoning steps. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 6609–6625.

Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil,
and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Self-RAG: Learn-

9

Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong,
Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen,
Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting
Liu. 2023. A survey on hallucination in large language models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and
open questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.05232.

DongGeon Lee and Hwanjo Yu. 2025. REFIND:
Retrieval-augmented factuality hallucination detection in large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.13622.
Patrick S. H. Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman
Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih,
Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe
Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for
knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 33, pages
9459–9474.

Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. 2021. Leveraging
passage retrieval with generative models for open domain question answering. In Proceedings of the 16th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume,
pages 874–880.

Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang,
Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Shuming Shi, and
Zhaopeng Tu. 2024. Encouraging divergent thinking
in large language models through multi-agent debate.
In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
17889–17904.

Soyeong Jeong, Jinheon Baek, Sukmin Cho, Sung Ju
Hwang, and Jong Park. 2024. Adaptive-RAG: Learning to adapt retrieval-augmented large language models through question complexity. In Proceedings of
the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 7036–7050.

Ritwik Mishra, Rajiv Ratn Shah, and Ponnurangam
Kumaraguru. 2025. Long-context non-factoid question answering in Indic languages. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.13615.

Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego
de Las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel,
Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock,
Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral
7B. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825.

OpenAI. 2024. GPT-4o system card. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.21276.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray,
John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke
Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe.
2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022.

Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2017. TriviaQA: A large scale distantly
supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1601–1611.
Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick
Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and
Wen-tau Yih. 2020. Dense passage retrieval for opendomain question answering. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 6769–6781.

Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt
Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word representations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, June 1-6, 2018, Volume 1
(Long Papers), pages 2227–2237.

Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion Jones,
Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai,
Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov. 2019.
Natural Questions: A benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 7:452–466.

Zackary Rackauckas. 2024. RAG-Fusion: a new take
on retrieval-augmented generation. International
Journal on Natural Language Computing, 13:37–47.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions
for machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings
of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 2383–2392.

Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying
Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient
memory management for large language model serving with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the 29th
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, page
611–626.

Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot,
and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022. MuSiQue: Multihop questions via single-hop question composition.

10

Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 10:539–554.
Ellen M. Voorhees and Dawn M. Tice. 2000. The
TREC-8 question answering track. In Proceedings
of the Second International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation.
Shitao Xiao, Zheng Liu, Peitian Zhang, Niklas Muennighoff, Defu Lian, and Jian-Yun Nie. 2024. C-Pack:
Packed resources for general Chinese embeddings.
In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, page 641–649.
Shi-Qi Yan, Jia-Chen Gu, Yun Zhu, and Zhen-Hua Ling.
2024. Corrective retrieval augmented generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15884.
Diji Yang and Omar Alonso. 2024. A bespoke question
intent taxonomy for e-commerce. In Proceedings
of the ACM SIGIR Workshop on eCommerce 2024
co-located with the 47th International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 2024), Washington D.C.,
USA, July 18, 2024, volume 3843 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings.
Sihui Yang, Keping Bi, Wanqing Cui, Jiafeng Guo, and
Xueqi Cheng. 2024. LINKAGE: Listwise ranking
among varied-quality references for non-factoid QA
evaluation via LLMs. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 6985–7000.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio,
William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christopher D. Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A dataset for
diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
2369–2380.
Liang Zhang, Katherine Jijo, Spurthi Setty, Eden Chung,
Fatima Javid, Natan Vidra, and Tommy Clifford.
2024. Enhancing large language model performance
to answer questions and extract information more
accurately. arXiv preprint arXiv 2402.01722.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q.
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. BERTScore:
Evaluating text generation with BERT. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations.

11

A

Prompt Details

A.1

Reference List Construction

Prompt Template to Generate the Highest Standard Reference Answer
Given a non-factoid question:"{question}" and its answer:"{ground_truth}"
Use your internal knowledge to rewrite this answer.
Figure 5: Prompt template proposed by Yang et al. (2024) to generate the highest standard reference answer using
LLM’s internal knowledge.

Prompt Template to Generate Diverse Qualities of Reference Answers
Generate three different answers to a non-factoid question from good to bad in quality, each inferior to the golden
answer I give you. Ensure that the quality gap from good to bad is very significant among these three answers. Golden
answer is the reasonable and convincing answer to the question. Answer 1 can be an answer to the question, however, it
is not sufficiently convincing. Answer 2 does not answer the question or if it does, it provides an unreasonable answer.
Answer 3 is completely out of context or does not make any sense.
Here are 3 examples for your reference.
1.Non-factoid Question: how can we get concentration on something?
Golden Answer: To improve concentration, set clear goals, create a distraction-free environment, use time management
techniques like the Pomodoro Technique, practice mindfulness, take regular breaks, stay organized, limit multitasking,
practice deep work, maintain physical health, and seek help if needed.
Output:
Answer 1: Improve focus: set goals, quiet space, Pomodoro Technique, mindfulness, breaks, organization, limit
multitasking, deep work, health, seek help if needed.
Answer 2: Just like and enjoy the work you do, concentration will come automatically.
Answer 3: If you are student, you should concentrate on studies and don’t ask childish questions.
2.Non-factoid Question: Why doesn’t the water fall off earth if it’s round?
Golden Answer: Earth’s gravity pulls everything toward its center, including water. Even though Earth is round, gravity
keeps water and everything else anchored to its surface. Gravity’s force is strong enough to counteract the Earth’s
curvature, preventing water from falling off.
Output:
Answer 1: This goes along with the question of why don’t we fall off the earth if it is round. The answer is because
gravity is holding us (and the water) down.
Answer 2: Same reason the people don’t.
Answer 3: When rain drops fall through the atmosphere CO2 becomes dissolved in the water. CO2 is a normal
component of the Earth’s atmosphere, thus the rain is considered naturally acidic.
3.Non-factoid Question: How do I determine the charge of the iron in FeCl3?
Golden Answer: Since chloride ions (Cl-) each carry a charge of -1, and there are three chloride ions in FeCl3, the total
negative charge from chloride ions is -3. To balance this, the iron ion (Fe) must have a charge of +3 to ensure the
compound has a neutral overall charge. Therefore, the charge of the iron ion in FeCl3 is +3.
Output:
Answer 1: Charge of Fe in Fecl3 is 3. Iron has either 2 as valancy or 3. in this case it bonds with three chlorine
molecules. therefore its valency and charge is three.
Answer 2: If two particles (or ions, or whatever) have opposite charge, then one has positive charge and one has
negative charge.
Answer 3: take a piece of iron. Wrap a copper wire around the iron in tight close coils. run a charge through the wire.
Below are the non-factoid question, and the golden answer.
Non-factoid Question: {question}
Golden Answer: {ground_truth}
Output:

Figure 6: Prompt template proposed by Yang et al. (2024) to generate diverse qualities of reference answers.

12

A.2

Reference Answers Annotation

System Prompt for Reference Answers Annotation
Your task is to evaluate the relevance and quality of multiple candidate answers for a given
non-factoid question.
Please evaluate the quality of each answer in a step-by-step manner.
Follow the structured guidelines below to ensure consistency and accuracy in your evaluation.
# Notes on Candidate Answers
Multiple candidate answers can come in two forms:
- Single choice answer: A single string, e.g., `"born again"`.
- Multiple choice answer: A list of strings, e.g., `[‘traffic calming’, ‘aesthetics’]`.
When evaluating multiple choice answers, treat the entire list as a single unit. Do **not** split
them into individual components; instead, evaluate the overall quality as a whole.
# Evaluation Criteria
Assign a label to each candidate answer based on the following criteria:
- 3: The answer provides a comprehensive, accurate, and contextually relevant response that
directly addresses the question.
- 2: The answer is accurate and relevant but lacks depth or comprehensive coverage.
- 1: The answer is somewhat relevant but contains inaccuracies, vagueness, or insufficient detail.
- 0: The answer is irrelevant, incorrect, or fails to address the question meaningfully.
**If there are two or more answers that you think are close in quality, you can give the same label.**
# Response Format
- Assign a label to each answer strictly in the format: `Answer X: [[Y]]`, where `X` is the answer
number, and `Y` is the integer score (0-3).
- Do **not** include any additional comments or explanations outside this format.
Input Prompt Template for Reference Answers Annotation
# Inputs
- Non-Factoid Question: {question}
- Candidate Answers:
{reference_answers}
Figure 7: System prompt (top) and input prompt template (bottom) adapted from Yang et al. (2024) for annotating
the quality level of generated reference answers.

13

A.3

Prompt templates for Baseline Methods

Prompt template for LLM
You are an assistant for answering questions.
Answer the following question.
### Question
{question}
### Answer
Figure 8: Prompt template for LLM method.

Prompt template for RAG
You are an assistant for answering questions.
Refer to the references below and answer the following question.
### References
{reference_passages}
### Question
{question}
### Answer
Figure 9: Prompt template for RAG method.

14

A.4
A.4.1

Prompt templates for T YPED -RAG
Comparison

Prompt Template for Keyword Extraction in Comparison Type Questions
You are a query analysis assistant. Based on the query type, apply the relevant prompt to transform
the query to better align with the user’s intent, ensuring clarity and precision.
Determine if the input query is a compare-type question (i.e., compare/contrast two or more things,
understand their differences/similarities.) as a "Query Analyst". If so, perform the following:
1. Identify the type of comparison: "differences", "similarities", or "superiority".
2. Extract the subjects of comparison and represent them as specific, contextualized phrases.
### Output format
{"is_compare": true/false, "compare_type": "", "keywords_list": []}
### Example
Query: "Who is more intelligent than humans on earth?"
Analysis:
{"is_compare": true, "compare_type": "superiority", "keywords_list": ["human intelligence", "the
intelligence of other beings"]}
### Input
Query: {query}
### Output
Analysis:

Figure 10: Prompt template for keyword extraction in Comparison type questions.

Prompt Template for Generating a Response to Comparison Type Questions
You are an assistant for answering questions.
You are given the extracted parts of a long document and a question. Refer to the references below
and answer the following question.
The question is a compare-type with a specific comparison type and keywords indicating the items to compare.
Answer based on this comparison type and the target keywords provided.
### Inputs
Question: {question}
Comparison Type: {comparison_type}
Keywords: {keywords}
References:
{reference_passages}
### Output
Answer:
Figure 11: Prompt template for generating a response to Comparison type questions.

15

A.4.2 Experience
Figure 12 shows the prompt template for responding to Experience type questions. The retrieved passages
are subsequently re-ranked based on the extracted keywords. After reranking, we use the prompt template
for RAG (Figure 9) to generate answers.
Prompt Template for Keyword Extraction in Experience Type Questions
You are a query analysis assistant. Based on the query type, apply the relevant prompt to transform
the query to better align with the user’s intent, ensuring clarity and precision.
The input question is an experience-type question (i.e., get advice or recommendations on a
particular topic.). As a "Query Analyst", please evaluate this question and proceed with the
following steps.
1. Identify the topic intended to be gathered from experience-based questions.
2. Extract the key entities in the question, considering the intent of asking about experience, to
facilitate an accurate response.
### Output format
`["Keyword 1", ..., "Keyword N"]` (List of string, separated with comma)
### Example
Question (Input): "What are some of the best Portuguese wines?"
Answer (Output): ["Portuguese wines", "best"]
### Input
Question: {question}
### Output
Answer:
Figure 12: Prompt template for keyword extraction in Experience type questions.

16

A.4.3

Reason & Instruction

Prompt Template for Generating Sub-queries in Reason Type Questions
You are a query analysis assistant. Based on the query type, apply the relevant prompt to transform the query to better
align with the user’s intent, ensuring clarity and precision.
The input query is a reason-type question (i.e., a question posed to understand the reason behind a particular concept or
phenomenon). As a "Query Analyst", please evaluate this query and proceed with the following steps.
1. Break down the original instruction into multiple sub-queries that preserve the core intent but use varied
language and structure. These multiple sub-queries should aim to capture different linguistic expressions of the original
instruction while still aligning with its intended meaning.
2. Create at least 2 to 5 distinct multiple sub-queries.
### Output format
`["sub-query 1", ..., "sub-query N"]` (List of string, separated with comma)
### Input
Query: {query}
### Output
Multiple sub-queries:

Figure 13: Prompt template for generating sub-queries in Reason type questions.

Prompt Template for Generating Sub-queries in Instruction Type Questions
You are a query analysis assistant. Based on the query type, apply the relevant prompt to transform the query to better
align with the user’s intent, ensuring clarity and precision.
The input query is an instruction-type question (i.e., Instructions/guidelines provided in a step-by-step manner).
As a "Query Analyst", please evaluate this query and proceed with the following steps.
1. Break down the original instruction into multiple sub-queries that preserve the core intent but use varied language
and structure.
These multiple sub-queries should aim to capture different linguistic expressions of the original instruction while still
aligning with its intended meaning.
2. Create at least 2 to 5 distinct multiple sub-queries.
### Output format
`["sub-query 1", ..., "sub-query N"]` (List of string, separated with comma)
### Input
Query: {query}
### Output
Multiple sub-queries:

Figure 14: Prompt template for generating sub-queries in Instruction type questions.

Prompt Template for Aggregating Answers to an Original Question
You are an assistant tasked with aggregating answers to a question.
You are provided with the original question and multiple question-answer pairs. These queries preserve the core intent
of the original question but use varied language and structure. Your goal is to review the question-answer pairs and
synthesize a concise and accurate response to the original question based on the information provided.
Using the information from the question-answer pairs, generate a brief and clear answer to the original question.
### Inputs
Original Question: {original_question}
Question-Answer Pairs:
{qa_pairs_text}
### Output
Aggregated Answer:

Figure 15: Prompt template for aggregating answers to an original question. Used by Reason type questions and
Instruction type questions.

17

A.4.4

Debate

Prompt Template for Generating Sub-queries in Debate Type Questions
You are a query analysis assistant. Based on the query type, apply the relevant prompt to transform the query to better
align with the user’s intent, ensuring clarity and precision.
The input question is a debate-type question (i.e., invites multiple perspectives). As a "Query Analyst", please evaluate
this question and proceed with the following steps.
1. Extract the debate topic.
2. Identify 2 to 5 key perspectives on this topic.
3. Generate a sub-query reflecting each perspective’s bias.
Ensure each sub-query fits a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) framework, seeking passages that align with the
viewpoint.
### Output format
{"debate_topic": {topic}, "dist_opinion": [list of perspectives], "sub-queries": {"opinion1": "biased sub-query for
opinion1", "opinion2": "biased sub-query for opinion2", ...}
### Example
Query: "Is Trump a good president?"
Answer:
{
"debate_topic": "Donald Trump’s presidency",
"dist_opinion": ["positive", "negative", "neutral"],
"sub-queries": {
"positive": "Was Donald Trump one of the best presidents for economic growth?",
"negative": "Did Trump’s presidency harm the U.S. economy and leadership?",
"neutral": "Can we assess Trump’s tenure’s strengths and weaknesses?"
}
}
### Input
Query: {query}
### Output
Answer:
Prompt Template for Debate Mediator in Debate Type Questions
You are acting as the mediator in a debate.
Below is a topic and responses provided by n participants, each with their own perspective. Your task is to synthesize
these responses by considering both the debate topic and each participant’s viewpoint, providing a fair and balanced
summary. Ensure the response maintains balance, captures key points, and distinguishes any opposing opinions.
Present the answer *short and concise*, phrased in a direct format without using phrases like "participants in the
debate" or "in the debate."
### Input format
- Debate topic: {debate_topic}
- Participant’s responses:
- Response 1: "{response content}" (Perspective: {perspective 1})
- Response 2: "{response content}" (Perspective: {perspective 2})
- ...
- Response N: "{response content}" (Perspective: {perspective N})
### Output format
A short and concise summary from the mediator’s perspective based on the discussion, phrased as a direct answer
without reference to the debate structure or participants
### Inputs
Debate topic: {debate_topic}
Participant’s responses: {responses}
### Output
Summary:

Figure 16: Prompt templates for generating sub-queries (top) and debate mediator (bottom) in Debate type questions.
We reference the debate mediator prompt from Liang et al. (2024) to ensure that responses objectively aggregate
and present diverse perspectives.

18

B

Implementation Details

NQ-NF, SQuAD-NF, and TriviaQA-NF These
benchmarks feature open-ended non-factoid questions that often demand explanatory or elaborate
answers. T YPED -RAG delivers substantial gains
in both MRR and MPR, demonstrating its ability to
generate detailed, on-topic responses. For instance,
on SQuAD-NF using the Mistral-7B base model
with a GPT-4o mini scorer, T YPED -RAG achieves
an MRR of 0.7444—significantly outperforming
the LLM-only (0.4222) and RAG-based (0.3817)
baselines.

All experiments were conducted using the NVIDIA
A100 (80 GB) GPUs and the OpenAI API.
B.1

LLM

For all experiments involving open-source LLMs,
we employ vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023) to enable
fast and memory-efficient inference.
B.2

RAG

To perform NFQA with our RAG-based QA system, the retriever selects five passages that are
then provided to the generator as references. For
Wikipedia-based tasks, we use BM25 on the
Wikipedia corpus preprocessed by Karpukhin et al.
(2020) as the external retrieval index.
B.3

HotpotQA-NF and MuSiQue-NF These
datasets require multi-hop reasoning, where
answers must synthesize information from
multiple passages. By decomposing questions
into type-specific aspects, T YPED -RAG more
effectively navigates these complex reasoning
chains, yielding notable improvements in MPR
compared to both LLM and RAG methods.

T YPED -RAG

A detailed overview of T YPED -RAG is shown in
Figure 17.
The reranker employed in T YPED -RAG is BGEReranker-Large2 (Xiao et al., 2024).
B.4

2WikiMultiHopQA-NF Although
overall
scores are lower on this particularly challenging
dataset, T YPED -RAG still surpasses LLM-only
and RAG baselines. This result underscores
T YPED -RAG’s robustness even in scenarios
demanding extensive, multi-step inference.

LINKAGE Evaluation

For LINKAGE evaluation, we adhere to the original settings: nucleus sampling (top_p = 0.95),
a maximum output length of 512 tokens, and a
default temperature of 0.8. The temperature is reduced to 0.1 when annotating reference answers.
B.5

Reference Answer Construction on
Wiki-NFQA

To build reference answers for the Wiki-NFQA
dataset, we use three LLMs to capture diverse
styles: (i) GPT-3.5-turbo-16k, (ii) Mistral-7BInstruct-v0.23 (Jiang et al., 2023), and (iii) Llama3.1-8B-Instruct4 . Each model generates three highquality responses, totaling nine reference answers.
Additionally, we use GPT-4o-2024-08-06 (OpenAI, 2024) to produce a single, superior reference
answer that is distinct from the other nine.

C

Detailed Analysis per Dataset

We conduct a dataset-specific analysis to highlight T YPED -RAG’s strengths across different
challenge contexts.
2

https://huggingface.co/BAAI/
bge-reranker-large
3
https://huggingface.co/mistralai/
Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2
4
https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.
1-8B-Instruct

19

(a) Evidence-based
Multi-aspect
Query

Retriever

𝐾𝐾 References

Generator

Result

(b) Comparison
Multi-aspect
Query

Multi-aspect
Decomposer

𝑁𝑁 × 𝐾𝐾 References

𝑁𝑁 Single-aspect
Queries

Retriever

Top-𝐾𝐾 Reranked
References

Generator

Reranker

Result

Compare Type

(c) Experience
Multi-aspect
Query

Multi-aspect
Decomposer

𝑁𝑁 Single-aspect
Queries

Retriever

Generator

Reranker

Result

Top-𝐾𝐾 Reranked
References

𝐾𝐾 References

(d) Reason / Instruction
Multi-aspect
Query

Multi-aspect
Decomposer

Single-aspect
Single-aspect
𝑁𝑁 Single-aspect
Query
Query
Queries

Retriever

Generator

𝑁𝑁 Responses

Result
Answer
Aggregator

(e) Debate
Multi-aspect
Query

Multi-aspect
Decomposer

Single-aspect
Single-aspect
𝑁𝑁 Single-aspect
Query
Query
Queries

Retriever

Generator

Topic-aspect

Figure 17: A detailed overview of T YPED -RAG.

20

𝑁𝑁 Responses

Result
Answer
Aggregator

D

Case Study

NFQ Type

Example of Question

Response of T YPED -RAG

Evidence-based

How does sterilisation
help to keep the money
flow even?

The term "sterilisation" is often used in economics
to refer to the act of preventing currency or securities
from affecting the monetary base due to interest rate
differentials. When a central bank engages in open
market operations to buy or sell securities, it may
want to prevent the money flow from being disrupted
by interest rate differentials in different markets.
Sterilisation helps to keep the money flow even
by offsetting the effect of open market operations
on the monetary base. When a central bank buys
securities, it injects cash into the economy and
increases the monetary base. However, if this leads
to an appreciation of the domestic currency, it may
reduce the competitiveness of exports and increase
the cost of imports. To prevent this, the central bank
may sell an equivalent amount of foreign currency
in the foreign exchange market, which reduces the
monetary base and helps to offset the initial effect of
the open market operation.
Similarly, if a central bank sells securities, it
decreases the monetary base and may lead to a
depreciation of the domestic currency, which can
make exports more competitive and imports more
expensive. To prevent this, the central bank may
buy an equivalent amount of foreign currency in
the foreign exchange market, which increases the
monetary base and helps to offset the initial effect of
the open market operation.
In summary, sterilisation is a tool used by central
banks to keep the money flow even and maintain
control over the monetary base, despite open market
operations that may otherwise disrupt the flow of
funds. It allows central banks to implement monetary
policy while minimizing the impact on currency
values and other macroeconomic variables.
Continued on next page

21

NFQ Type

Example of Question

Response of T YPED -RAG

Comparison

what is the difference
between dysphagia and
odynophagia

Dysphagia and odynophagia are two distinct
conditions related to swallowing.
Dysphagia is the medical term for difficulty
swallowing. It can be caused by various conditions,
including neurological disorders, stroke, cancer,
or structural problems in the throat or esophagus.
Symptoms of dysphagia include the sensation of
food sticking in the throat or chest, coughing or
choking during eating, and pain or discomfort while
swallowing.
On the other hand, odynophagia is the medical term for pain while swallowing. It is a symptom
of an underlying condition, such as a sore throat,
inflammation, or infection. The pain can be described as sharp or throbbing and may be worsened
by swallowing solid or acidic foods. Odynophagia
can also be a symptom of gastroesophageal reflux
disease (GERD) or eosinophilic esophagitis.
In summary, dysphagia is a condition that
makes it difficult to swallow, while odynophagia
is a symptom of pain while swallowing. A person
with dysphagia may also experience pain while
swallowing, but the primary issue is the difficulty
in moving food from the mouth to the stomach.
Conversely, a person with odynophagia primarily
experiences pain while swallowing, but they may
still be able to swallow relatively normally.
Continued on next page

22

NFQ Type

Example of Question

Response of T YPED -RAG

Experience

What are some of the best
Portuguese wines?

Based on the available references in the document,
some Portuguese wines that are often considered
excellent include:
1. The reference 14098516 might be referring to Port
Wine, a fortified wine produced in the Douro Valley
region. Port Wine is known for its sweet and rich
flavors and comes in various styles such as Tawny,
Ruby, and White Port.
2. Reference 5043240 could be referring to Vinho
Verde, a light, slightly effervescent wine from the
Vinho Verde region in the north of Portugal. It is
typically low in alcohol and is often served chilled.
3. The Douro region is also famous for its red wines,
such as those referenced in 2866435. These wines
are known for their robust flavors and are often
blended from a variety of grape varieties.
4. The reference 4891311 might be referring to
Madeira Wine, another fortified wine from the
Madeira Islands. Madeira Wine is known for its
complex flavors and can range from sweet to dry.
5. Lastly, the reference 309483 could be referring
to Dã Wines, which come from the Dã region in
central Portugal. These wines are known for their
elegance and balance, with flavors of red fruit, herbs,
and minerals.
So, based on the given references, some of
the best Portuguese wines include Port Wine, Vinho
Verde, Douro Red Wines, Madeira Wine, and Dã
Wines.

Reason

Kresy, which roughly was
a part of the land beyond
the so-called Curson Line,
was drawn for what
reason?

The Curzon Line refers to the boundary proposed
by Lord Curzon, then Viceroy of India, in 1920, as
a potential eastern border for a future independent
Poland. Kresy, or Eastern Borderlands, was the area
of land beyond this proposed border. It was drawn
for various reasons, including historical, ethnic, and
strategic considerations. The area had been part of
the Polish state in the past, and there was a significant
Polish population there. Ethnically, the region was
diverse, with various groups including Poles, Ukrainians, Belarusians, and Jews. Strategically, the region
was important due to its location near the borders
of several neighboring countries and its rich natural
resources.
Continued on next page

23

NFQ Type

Example of Question

Response of T YPED -RAG

Instruction

How can you find a lodge
to ask to be a member of?

To find a lodge to inquire about membership,
consider the following steps:
1. Contact the Grand Lodge of your jurisdiction (state or country) for a list of lodges in your
area. You can usually find this information on their
website or by contacting them directly.
2. Research the lodges on the list to learn more about
their history, traditions, and meeting times. This can
be done through their websites, social media pages,
or by contacting them directly.
3. Attend a few meetings as a visitor to get a feel for
the lodge and its members. You may need to request
an invitation from the lodge’s secretary or master.
4. Speak with current members about their experiences and the expectations for new members. This
can help you determine if the lodge is a good fit for
you.
5. Consider your availability and the lodge’s meeting
schedule to ensure you can commit to attending
meetings regularly.
Remember, every lodge is unique, so it’s essential to find one that aligns with your values and
interests. Good luck in your search!
(Note: The references provided do not contain information relevant to finding a lodge to ask to
be a member of.)

Debate

I Can See Your Voice, a
reality show from South
Korea, offers what kind of
performers a chance to
make their dreams of
stardom a reality?

Based on the information provided in the references,
"I Can See Your Voice" is a South Korean reality
show that offers singers a chance to audition without
revealing their appearance or singing voice to the
judges initially. This format is designed to evaluate
contestants based on their charisma, rhythm, and
overall performance without any biases influenced by
their physical appearance or singing voice. Therefore,
the show provides an opportunity for talented singers
who might not have been given a chance due to their
looks or voice in their initial auditions to showcase
their abilities and pursue their dreams of stardom.

Table 4: Sample responses of T YPED -RAG across various non-factoid question types.

24

